# Designing better React components

## Introduction

-  Component - independent, reusable building blocks of a UI
   -  React class components extend `React.Component` and implement a `render` function that returns JSX
   -  React function components return JSX <- style to use (seems to be dominant focus for React in general)
-  All course code on GitHub `pkellner/pluralsight-designing-react-components-course-code`
-  Demo app is a conference speakers/sessions app

## Development environment

-  VS Code
-  Next.js
-  `npm i react react-dom next`
-  Add scripts for Next.js (dev, build, start)
-  Next.js uses file based routing. Any `.js` in `pages` maps to `localhost/<filename-minus-js>`; `index.js` is `localhost` root
-  Create a simple "Hello world" component in `pages/index.js` to confirm the parts are there
-  `npm run dev` to see it work

When he gets to setting up a the real application,, I'll look at the Next.js TypeScript info and set up a TS application.
Ref: https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/typescript
Looks like:

-  `npm install --save-dev typescript @types/react @types/react-dom @types/node`
   OR
-  `npx create-next-app@latest --ts`

and then just use TS where appropriate.

## Concepts and decisions

-  React applications are sets of components that use properties and state to render the application; changing state changes what's rendered
-  Starting point for an application is thinking about how to break it down into components. (I say it's like how a graphic designer/typographer might look at a page.)
   -  What are the major parts of the UI?
   -  What are the repeating parts of those parts that can be generalized and reused?
   -  What is the right level of decomposition/composition?
-  Common chunks of a UI include:
   -  Header (title, logo, etc.)
   -  Navigation or primary controls
   -  Main content area
   -  Footer
   -  Each of these may be broken into smaller parts
-  In the demo app
   -  The main content area has a set of speaker/session cards -- build a Card component and reuse it (DRY)
   -  The header has a sign-in/out button with a user name -- seems like a candidate (single responsibility -- header doesn't need that logic)
   -  Sometimes pieces should be combined (header logo + title) -- manage complexity (making them separate doesn't get real benefits)
-  Speaker cards have an image, name, favorite tag, biography, company, Twitter link, and a list of session titles and locations

   -  Recognize similar components (icons with associated text) and think in terms of inheritance

-  Get assets and starting pages from GitHub repo. I'll TS-ify them.
   -  He's using `_document.js` as the page template. I'm guessing that's a Next.js thing.

**COMMIT 1.0.1 - CHORE: build a simple dev environment and test it with Hello World**

### Setting up my working space

-  Install TS bits - `npm install --save-dev typescript @types/react @types/react-dom @types/node`
   -  NOTE: Did this before commit 1.0.1 (oops)
-  Get his GH repo into a local directory and move it into my work space
-  Install ESlint - `npm install eslint eslint-config-next` and add `lint` script and `npm run lint` to set up `.eslintrc.json`
-  Enable Prettier on TS-react -> Command Palette (Ctrl + Shift + P), Preferences: Open Settings (JSON), add below [from StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/61731587/prettier-doesnt-format-tsx-file)

```JSON
"[typescriptreact]": {
    "editor.defaultFormatter": "esbenp.prettier-vscode"
},
```

-  Change .js files to .ts/.tsx files and add types where appropriate.
-  Update `tsconfig.json` based on what `create-next-app --ts` creates (I created in another directory and copied)
   -  Keeping it around in case I need to refer to it later (minus `node_modules`).
   -  Also `next.config.js`

And it's compiling and rendering, so we have the basic environment I want to use for the course together.

**COMMIT: 1.0.2: CHORE: build baseline setup I want to use**

## First application steps

-  Render a list of speakers (`SpeakerData.ts`) with Bootstrap-ified formatting.
   -  Get one working first
   -  Lots of JSX/HTML stuff flying around here with little detail (this ain't an HTML course, after all)
-  It renders

**COMMIT: 1.0.3: FEAT: render a card for one speaker**

-  Let's render them all with a `data.map()` in the Bootstrap row.
   -  Linter rules want an id on each speaker card, so I added one. (Then he said, "Remember to add a key.")

**COMMIT: 1.0.4 - FEAT: render cards for all the speakers**

## Breaking down the giant everything component

Before continuing, I'm changing some names in `SpeakerData.ts`. For example, the attribtue name `first` is insanely ambiguous.

-  Defined and exported interfaces `IRoom`, `ISession`, and `ISpeaker`
-  Renamed attributes and declared `data: ISpeaker[]`
-  Changed `index.tsx` to use new names.
-  Moved all application specific code (`pages`) into a `src` directory

### Why break it down

-  Too many things happening in one place
   -  Data retrieval and preparation
   -  Many different UI bits that are relatively independent
   -  UI bits that will have different behaviors
   -  Single responsibility principle argues for splitting this up
   -  Splitting the component into smaller pieces makes each easier to reason about
      -  Requires interfaces between components which makes them explicit and reduces changes of corruption

What it looks like now (all in one big blob)

-  Index
   -  Speakers list (container)
      -  Speakers (row, `data.map()`)
         -  Speaker card (item, `key={speakerId}`)
            -  Speaker image
            -  Speaker information
               -  Name
               -  Biography
            -  Session(s)
               -  Session name
               -  Room information

If we break it down, we get something more like

-  Index { container bits; Speakers(speakers) }
-  SpeakersList { row bits; SpeakerCard(speaker) } -- May decompose speaker here or in SpeakerCard
-  SpeakerCard { card bits; Sessions(sessions) })
-  Sessions { sessions row or whatever bits; Session(session) }
-  Probably with a bit more breakdown or some sane merging

So instead of having a big chunk of nested components, we have a set of smaller, chained components -- become more significant with more complex applications.

### Thinking about breaking it down

Starting from the inside out...

-  Single session
-  List of sessions
-  Speaker info (may decompose more later)
-  Speaker image
-  Speaker card
-  List of speakers

So, inverting that and nesting it...

-  List of speakers
   -  Speaker card - Speaker image - Speaker info - List of sessions - Session
      Which is basically the same as what's above, but will be easier to manage when we can focus on single units.

Include many components in a file or single component per file?

-  It depends. What works for you?
-  I prefer single component per file and define interfaces as needed. It's easier to focus and easier to see what's where.
-  If two components are very closely related and dependent on each other, it may make sense to keep them in one file.
-  If two components use same contexts or share state, it may make sense to keep them in one file.

### Extract first components

-  Session (`src/components/Session.tsx`)
   -  JSX -> contents of the `sessionBox` `<div>`
   -  Data needed -> sessionName, roomName
-  Sessions (`src/components/Sessions.tsx`)
   -  JSX -> `sessionBox` `<div>`
   -  Data needed -> sessions
   -  My thought: If Session won't be used outside Sessions, they may be a candidate for single file

**COMMIT 1.0.5 - REFACTOR: make separate components for an individual Session and the Sessions list**

## Ways to pass data

-  Pass attributes with simple, primitive values; destructure from props in the component
   -  `<Session sessionName={sessions[0].sessionName} roomName={session[0].room.roomName} />`
   -  `const Session = ({ sessionName, roomName } => {}`
-  Pass an object with all the data
   -  `<Session session={sessions[0]} />`
   -  `const Session = ({ session }) => { const { sessionName, room } = session ... {room.roomName} ... }`
   -  Could use nested destructuring, but can create maintainability issues and unexpected errors. Usually best to avoid.
-  Use spread (...) to decompose object
   -  `<Session {...session[0]} />`
   -  `const Session = ({ sessionName, room }) => { ... {room.roomName} ... }`
   -  May pass data the component doesn't need.

## Continue extracting components

-  SpeakerImage
   -  JSX -> `speaker-img` `<div>`
   -  Data needed -> speakerId, firstName, lastName
-  SpeakerInfo
   -  JSX -> `speaker-info` `<div>`
   -  Data needed -> firstName, lastName, bioText, companyName, twitterHandle
   -  This is an ideal case for spread because we need most of the speaker data
-  SpeakerCard
   -  JSX -> `key={speakerId}` `<div>` (SpeakerImage, SpeakerInfo, Sessions)
   -  Data needed -> speaker

**COMMIT: 1.0.6 - finish decomposing components**

Question: Should we keep these in separate files (like I've done)? Or does it make sense to merge some of them?

-  I think it makes sense to put at least the SpeakerCard, SpeakerImage, and SpeakerInfo components together.
-  I could be convinced it makes sense to include the Sessions and maybe the Session components, but I'm leaving them as is for now.
-  The instructor started with everything in one file, but is splitting all five components into one separate file.

Now, he's reformatting some of the SpeakerInfo data to be more readable and set up for future work.

-  More JSX/HTML styling stuff based on his design and style sheet

## Best practices notes

-  Destructuring data
   -  Reduces complexity when referring to data elements (`id` vs. `data[0].id` in example)
   -  Makes what you're using explicit so code is clearer
-  Keys (stable identifier for the data instance) reduce unwanted renders
-  When refactoring components into smaller units, usually best to start from the inside out.

## Key points

-  Good coding practices apply. Patterns are similar, but may vary a bit.

**COMMIT: 1.0.7 - REFACTOR: merge some SpeakerCard parts into SpeakerCard; format SpeakerInfo based on target UI design**
