# Performance, errors, and debugging

## Using React Dev Tools

Reading React-rendered code in the browser is hard. So is getting insight into component hierarchy, what's rendering, what code is running, etc. React Dev Tools for Chrome and Firefox makes these efforts easier. Install the extension. In Dev Tools, see Components and Profiler tabs for React Dev Tools.

Some features in the Chrome/Chromium version aren't in the Firefox version.

### Components

-  Shows the component hierarchy
   -  Highlights selected component in browser
-  Double-click zooms in on a specific component
-  Breadcrumbs at the top of the zoomed view let you navigate up
   -  Same with "Rendered by" section on right
-  Props, component hooks (state, context) and source file and line that rendered it on right too
   -  Props are editable; can add new values or change existing values
   -  Hooks, etc., are not editable
-  Upper right `<>` icon shows component source
   -  Instructor gets readable source, but I'm seeing Webpack mangled code in Firefox (Chrome/FF difference)
   -  Readable code is available under the Webpack item (left side) in the Sources tab; breakpoints work
      -  Can break on a line in `FavoriteToggle` and see the data at that point, but trying to step through too much can be problematic
      -  Seems mostly useful for small scale inspection
-  Upper right "eyeball" icon jumps to the component in the DOM inspector
-  Upper right "bug" icon logs the component to the console so you can inspect data there
   -  Can expand objects, arrays, etc., in console to see data
-  Search bar at the top of the component tree can help find components quickly

### Profiler

-  In Chrome, can "reload and profile", but not in FF (reload stops profile)
-  Need to record profiling sessions to see profile for specific actions, etc.
-  Flamegraph shows the render process and how long it takes
   -  Upper right of graph shows different segments of the render with different detail
   -  Four right gets to details of rending speaker cards
   -  Click on components for more details
   -  Components that didn't render are gray

## Render performance

### Using the profile to look for issues

-  Profile toggling a favorite
   -  Start profile (blue circle upper left)
   -  Toggle favorite
   -  Stop profile
   -  Reveals all speaker cards are rendered when only one changes
   -  Can confirm with a `console.log()` at the top of the component
-  Why did they render again?
   -  In settings (gear icon upper right), Profile tab, choose to show why rendered
   -  Profile again
   -  Hover over different component renders to see
      -  Props changed on all `SpeakerCard`s (update, insert, delete on all, also speaker data on toggled)
      -  React copies the functions so doesn't know they are the same

**COMMIT: 5.0.1 - DOCS: notes on React Dev Tools extension and profiling**

### Fixing the issue

Speakers render every time any speaker updates because `FavoriteToggle`'s `onClick` updates data through the `useRequestRest` hook.

React can't tell the data change affects only one `SpeakerCard`, so we need to ensure React can distinguish which `SpeakerCard` is affected. The `SpeakerCard` takes the three DML functions (insert, update, delete) and a speaker's data. The solution is to memoize the function call.

-  Memoization stores computation results in a cache and only updates when the value isn't cached

Syntax for React is `const Component = memo(function Component(...){...}, <function to determine if render needed>)`

-  eslint default rules for React require the `function Component` style syntax
-  `<function to determine if render needed>` is technically optional, but React does a shallow comparison, which means
   -  If passing an object, React doesn't inspect the object to determine if it changed, so assumes it did
   -  If passing a function, React doesn't know if it changed, so assumes it did
   -  So in practice, it's common to use it
-  In this case, we only need to render if `speaker.favoriteFlag` changed

The formal type definition is something like:

```typescript
function memo<Props extends object>(
	Component: SFC<Props>,
	propsAreEqual?: (
		prevProps: Readonly<PropsWithChildren<Props>>,
		nextProps: Readonly<PropsWithChildren<Props>>
	) => boolean
): NamedExoticCompnoent<PropsWithChildren<Props>>;
```

In practice, that leads to code like

```typescript
const MyComponent = memo(
   function MyComponent ({destructured props}: Props) { ... },
   (prevProps, nextProps) => { return (are props equal condition) }
);
```

You can write the function to compare only what you expect to change or you can use a generic deep comparison method from a library (node `isDeepStrictEqual()`, lodash `isEqual`, etc.) or write your own.

Now the profile shows only the changed speaker rendered.

But the whole speaker renders because `SpeakerImage` and `Sessions` are rendering when they aren't changing.

-  Does this matter? Probably not because the render cost for these is small vs. render cost of rendering dozens or more `SpeakerCard`s.
-  Key point, just because you can optimize something doesn't mean you should optimize it

**COMMIT: 5.0.1 - PERF: memoize SpeakerCard to render only SpeakerCards whose data changes**

## Handling errors with Boundary

In `SpeakerCard.ts`, `SpeakerInfo`, for the speaker's `bioText`, limit to 70 characters with `substring()`.

-  If the speaker doesn't have a `bioText` attribute, this will throw an error
-  Edit `db.json` to create a speaker with no `bioText`
-  In dev, it gives a useful error message, but in production, the message isn't helpful (BOOM)
   -  `npm run build` threw an error because `Speakers.tsx` was missing `startingEventYear` on the context
   -  Changed context props interface to make both input values optional and changed context to have defaults for them
-  Ideally, we want errors to fail only the affected component

[React error boundaries](https://reactjs.org/docs/error-boundaries.html) catch errors in their child component tree, log them, and use a fallback UI.

-  Get the `ErrorBoundary` class from the link
-  But since I'm using TypeScript I used a [TypeScript friendly ErrorBoundary](https://react-typescript-cheatsheet.netlify.app/docs/basic/getting-started/error_boundaries/) instead
-  Also note there's an npm package called `react-error-boundary` that is more sophisticated

Now, we need to wrap components in `ErrorBoundary`

-  For learning/demo purposes, rename the old component and create a new component with the original name that wraps the renamed component in `ErrorBoundary`

`npm run build` and `npm start` and we get an error message for the card, but others show.

This also works with `npm run dev`, though you get the detailed error popup too.

**COMMIT: 5.0.3 - FEAT: use ErrorBoundary to reduce error blast radius**

## Fallback component

This part of the module wants the `ErrorBoundary` to render a fallback component. So, I'm guessing we'll either:

-  Extend `ErrorBoundary` and override `render()` OR
-  Pass a prop (component) to `ErrorBoundary` that tells it what to render

He says `render()` should look for a prop and, if it exists, return it instead of the text.

-  I started by passing a simple `<div>errorUI</div>`, which worked, so now can make it prettier.
-  He passes it as a prop to the `SpeakerCardNoErrorBoundary` and makes it a copy of the existing speaker card with filler

He makes the error card part of `SpeakerCardNoErrorBoundary`, rendering if a new prop, `showErrorCard`, is true. Then he passes `SpeakerCardNoErrorBoundary` with `showErrorCard` true to `ErrorBoundary` as `errorUI`.

That feels kind of clunky to me, so I created an `ErrorSpeakerCard` component and passed it as `errorUI`. I also renamed `SpeakerCardNoErrorBoundary` to `OKSpeakerCard`. So, now `SpeakerCard` looks like this, which seems much clearer to me.

```jsx
return (
	<ErrorBoundary errorUI={<ErrorSpeakerCard />}>
		<OKSpeakerCard {...props}></OKSpeakerCard>
	</ErrorBoundary>
);
```

**COMMIT: 5.0.4 - FEAT: improve output from the ErrorBoundary**
